Hi.
Welcome to our session this afternoon.
So my name is Dean Reece and
I manage the I/O Kit team.
And today I'm going to be
talking to you a little bit
about UserLand Device Access.
Our talk is going to be broken
into three sections today.
I'll be talking for about
the first half of the hour.
And I'll be giving you sort of a general
survey of how all the user space device
access works from a very general level.
And then we'll be walking through a
pretty wide variety of API types that
are available for this use on the system.
And then Thane Norton will come up
and walk through a much more detailed
example of user space HID device driver.
And then after Thane is finished,
Ethan Bold is going to come up and
present the user space sleep/wake
APIs and some new sleep behaviors
that you'll be seeing with Lion.
So what you're going
to learn from my talk,
hopefully, is a little bit about the
Mac App Store and how that
relates to device drivers.
And we'll talk a bit about
the benefits and challenges
of user-space device software.
Getting into the APIs a little bit,
we'll look at device matching
and how to run a process when
a piece of hardware is present,
and then how that software
goes about finding the devices
and talking to them and so on.
And as I said, then we'll walk through a
variety of APIs for this.
So, the Mac App Store is this
great new feature that we have.
And of course,
as developers you want to be
able to deliver your content
through the App Store.
It's a great opportunity for you.
But there are some limitations
with respect to device software
that you need to be aware of.
First and foremost,
we do not allow you to ship kernel
extensions through the Mac App Store,
nor do we allow you to ship an app that
attempts to install the kernel extension.
So,
that obviously limits you to user space
only APIs right there out of the gate.
You also don't,
you're not allowed to have your app
run with privileged execution and
the app needs to be self-contained.
It has to stay within its app bundle.
So,
you don't have the opportunity to install
plug-ins into other parts of the system.
Also, not a hard restriction,
but something to be aware of is
App Store apps aren't allowed to
operate in the background without
express consent from the user.
So you can't have the app
automatically launch when the user
logs in or continue running after
the user dismisses it unless the
user has agreed to that explicitly.
[Transcript missing]
There's this session that we
had yesterday on the App Sandbox
and the Mac App Store that you
would be interested in going
and checking out on iTunes if
you think this is a distribution
vehicle you're interested in.
Now, developing software for user space
has some distinct advantages over
kernel-side software development,
not the least of which that you have
a much broader set of APIs available
to you because you've got a whole
collection of frameworks available,
whereas in the kernel,
you only have the kernel.framework.
You have much better
debugging options available.
You get to debug from within the
GUI Xcode debugging environment,
and there's a richer set of
performance tools available for
you to help optimize your software.
From the customer's perspective,
there's some advantages as well.
A fault in your software
won't crash the system.
Obviously,
a critical resource going wrong can cause
issues that the user would experience,
but it won't necessarily cause
their system to panic and
immediately require a restart.
And depending on exactly
what you're doing,
you may or may not even require
administrative credentials to be
able to install or use the APIs,
whereas kernel extensions require
that for just installing the
software in the first place.
And as I said earlier,
since you can't deliver a kernel
extension through the App Store,
well, user space development is pretty
much the only way to go and still be
compatible with the App Store at all.
Now that being said,
there are of course some
challenges that are different
from kernel extension development.
First off,
not all device types are available
from outside of the kernel.
Specifically,
devices that generate DMA cycles and
field direct interrupts generally are
not available outside of the kernel.
So PCI devices and Thunderbolt devices
in particular still will need to be
supported through kernel extensions.
But a very wide variety of devices like
USB and Bluetooth are available outside.
Now, we also have to think about being
able to publish devices from outside
the kernel because that's one of
the things that device drivers
typically want to be able to do.
They want to be able to
publish a new service.
And depending on exactly
what you're trying to do,
you may or may not be able
to do that from user space.
So we'll get into some more
details about that later.
And again, one of the advantages for user
space development was that you had
a wide variety of APIs available,
but it can also be a bit more
work because you've got more
API spaces to learn and use.
And depending on what
you're trying to do,
you may be bridging multiple API spaces,
which generally you don't have as
much effort to do inside the kernel.
And there is no out-of-kernel
driver stacking model like we have
with I/O Kit inside the kernel.
Inside the kernel,
you can stack kernel extensions in a
way that allows you to create a string
of drivers that talk to each other in
a very discoverable and manageable way.
And when you step outside the kernel,
you no longer have that mechanism.
[Transcript missing]
So even though we're not going to be
talking about kernel side development,
you do need to be aware
of the IO registry.
IO registry is a collection
of live driver objects that
are running in the kernel,
but even though it's kernel resident,
it's browsable from user space.
And this is very important because
you use this for discovery of devices.
Nearly all the devices we're
going to talk about today,
you will use the registry to get at.
And on the right hand
side of my slide here,
you'll see I've got a dump
of one node of the registry.
This happens to be a USB iSight camera
that's built into a current iMac.
And in particular,
I want to draw your attention to the
top line there where it says the class.
Every node in the registry represents
a C++ object inside the kernel,
and its class is your first
identification as to what
that object represents,
what other properties may be present,
what you can do to talk to it or
not talk to it as the case may be.
So in this particular
class as a USB device,
you'll see we've got a
variety of properties here.
And two of them in particular
that you'll be interested in
are the vendor and device ID.
No surprise there,
these identify a very particular device.
In this case,
it's our internal EyeSight camera.
Now, if you haven't already seen this,
I recommend you run ioreg-l or run the
ioregistry explorer application that's
available on our developer tools.
The properties you see here are
all visible to any user space app.
There's no administrative
permissions required,
and you can very easily explore
all the devices on your system.
So how do we do this programmatically?
Well, if you want to be able to have your
software identify and talk to a device,
obviously it's not going to
be browsing the registry.
You're going to have to create
something that allows it to
be searched programmatically.
And we're going to start with
a matching dictionary for that.
A matching dictionary literally
is a dictionary that describes
an object you're interested in.
And much like the previous slide,
we're going to start by
looking at the class.
And that narrows it down to a small
subset of the objects in the registry
that could potentially match the
dictionary you're putting together.
And within class,
the vendor and product ID specify exactly
what type of devices you're looking for.
And there may be a zero
of these on your system,
or one, or there may be 50.
It depends on what you're looking for.
But this matching dictionary is only
going to find this type of device.
So how do we go about using
this matching dictionary?
Let's say you've got a utility software,
could be a driver, could be an app.
You want it to launch as soon as this
device becomes present on a system.
Well, we have a new capability in
Lion that uses LaunchD to launch
when hardware is available.
And it's very straightforward.
Basically, you will start off
with this new property.
It's this new LaunchD property
called I/O Kit matching.
And within that,
you're going to specify the
matching dictionary I just
showed you how to construct.
Well, we have a new capability in
Lion that uses LaunchD to launch
when hardware is available.
And within that,
you're going to specify the
matching dictionary I just
showed you how to construct.
Now there's some more information,
of course, on LaunchD.
If you look in the man
page for launchd.plist,
I've been told that the new
I/O Kit matching capability has not
yet been added to the man page there,
but as you can see from my slide here,
there's not much to it.
So I recommend that you start
with the LaunchD man page,
and then you can go back and
view my slides from iTunes if you
need more info on the matching.
Okay, so now you have constructed
a matching dictionary.
You've created a launchd job.
It's launched your application.
What do you do?
How do you talk to the hardware?
Well,
your app is going to have to discover it.
So we're going to go back
to that matching dictionary.
And you're going to
pass that to IO Service,
get matching services.
This is going to give you a
list of devices on the system
that match your dictionary.
You're going to iterate
through those results.
Like I say, it could be zero or more.
And once you've Okay.
Identify the one you want,
then we'll talk about how
to open it in just a second.
But you can also become aware
of new devices that appear.
Let's say you had zero matches when
you launched or the device that
you were interested in went away.
You can become aware that new
devices that match your dictionary
have been attached to the system by
registering for this callback using
IO Service Add Matching Notifications.
All right,
so now you've either been notified or
you have discovered at launch time the
objects you're interested in talking to.
We're going to go ahead and call
IOCreatePlugInterfaceForService,
which literally does what it says.
It creates a plugin interface for the
service object that you've asked about.
And that will load into your
program a plugin that allows
you to communicate through
device-specific APIs to that device.
Not every node in the registry
will be able to do this.
The nodes in the registry that you can
talk to will return an object here,
otherwise this call will fail
if the node does not have a
user client available for it.
Okay, so that was a very general
walkthrough of the procedure for
discovering and talking to devices.
I'm now going to go through a variety
of technology areas and kind of give
you a very quick jumping off point.
If you're interested
in one of these areas,
you're going to have to dig
deeper than my presentation today.
So I'm going to go through
them fairly quickly,
and you can use the notes in these
slides as just sort of a starting point.
We're going to go first through the
bus level communication protocols,
and then we'll look at the
higher level service APIs.
So USB is probably the most
common way to expand a Mac.
It's also one of the richest APIs that
we have for user space device access.
There are two classes that
you can locate in the registry
and talk to from user space.
A USB device, which represents an entire
physical USB object.
And then I/O USB interface,
which represents a
fraction of a USB device,
typically.
We do allow access to USB devices
through the sandbox if you have
this device.usb entitlement.
So you'll have to ask for
that if your app needs to
talk directly to USB hardware.
And once a USB device is in use,
you're not going to be able to
necessarily steal it from the
software that's already got it in use.
So one of the particular workarounds
for this is to create a codeless KEXT.
This is not necessarily a great solution,
but it does work,
and it's the recommended
practice right now,
where you'll install a kernel extension
that has the matching dictionary,
which will basically hold
off in kernel drivers,
thinking that your codeless
KEXT is going to be the right
driver for this piece of software.
Or excuse me, for this hardware.
But in fact,
it doesn't have any code in it,
so no driver comes along to
take over the device in kernel.
And that gives your application time to
then run and take over from user space.
Okay, so Bluetooth is also a great
way to expand to Macintosh.
There's a variety of classes available,
but you don't go through the
registry as I described earlier.
You've got a whole Bluetooth framework
just for talking to Bluetooth devices.
And it allows you to
discover the devices.
Most of the time talking to
Bluetooth is done through services,
though.
You generally don't talk to the device.
You talk to a service
that the device vends.
And so the SDP service record is sort
of the key coin there of exchange for
discovering and talking to devices.
One thing to note,
if you're doing Bluetooth development,
you want to stick to the
Objective-C APIs and shy
away from the C APIs.
Those are the old-style APIs we're
not encouraging for new development,
so go to look at the Objective-C APIs.
We currently do not have any entitlements
that would allow application access
to Bluetooth devices through Sandbox.
But apps can publish
new Bluetooth services,
which is kind of interesting.
It's a little different
than you might expect.
The Macintosh itself can
actually vend a Bluetooth service
to other Bluetooth clients.
So you could do Mac to
Mac Bluetooth services
if you're interested.
And in fact,
that service will even launch
your app when a remote client
tries to gain access to it.
So it's kind of a neat feature.
And also Bluetooth services can
often be shared by multiple apps.
The details are device specific,
but it's not purely mutual exclusion.
Firewire is also a fantastic bus for
doing lots of different things on a Mac.
There are a variety of classes available.
You do wind up going through
the registry to locate them.
And we've got some very base level
classes for Firewire Unit and
Firewire Device for talking
kind of right at the metal.
And then we've got some higher
level classes that you probably
wouldn't use because they'll tend to
be abstracted by other services in
the system like SPP2 will generally
be abstracted for you by SCSI tasks.
So you can use the same thing for
the same user client or stuck.
And then AV is usually handled
at a higher level as well.
And we do not have any sandbox
entitlements that will allow you to
get to Firewire devices directly.
And SCSI is one of those things
that kind of brings to mind giant
connectors that look like harmonicas,
but SCSI is alive and well in a
modern Macintosh in protocol form.
The SCSI protocol is still
very much alive and well,
and is used like for optical drives
and a few other devices as well.
So you can discover these devices using,
as I said previously,
the SCSI task user client,
and you would find them in the registry.
You can talk to them by
requesting the plug-in,
as I described earlier,
but we don't have any sandbox access.
As far as mutual exclusion goes,
you generally can't talk to a
SCSI protocol device that's in use,
with the exception of authoring devices.
If you've got an optical drive
that has the ability to burn,
then you can often open sort of
an around connection that will
allow you to author to the device,
even if there's a blocked
storage driver attached above it.
Serial, this is another protocol
that's alive and well.
Again, we're not really talking RS-232,
though it can certainly be.
Serial is used for a lot of Bluetooth and
USB devices as an underlying protocol.
If you have a device that presents
as a serial device in the system,
you will find the device in the registry,
as I described earlier.
But you won't use the registry
as the communication protocol.
Instead, you're going to use our
POSIX TTY interface to
actually talk to the device.
So we have device nodes.
The TTY generally, as Unix tradition,
is for inbound connections.
And the CU or call-up or call-Unix
ports would be for outbound connections.
This is very old-school serial stuff,
but this is the way it's done.
There is currently no sandbox
access for serial devices.
And apps cannot use an
in-use serial device.
Once the device has been opened,
it's opened.
So if you're going to have a piece
of software talking to serial,
you should make sure you get an open it
first or make sure that all the clients
make sure and close it when they're
done so it can be shared as needed.
Now audio, audio is a really fantastic
example of what you can do
from user space on Mac OS X.
The core audio APIs are very rich and
pretty much put you on an equal footing
with what you can do in the kernel.
So, everything is done through,
all device access is done through HAL,
the hardware abstraction layer.
And there's the audio output unit,
which is a plug-in that you can load
into your software and do audio in,
audio out.
You can create new interfaces.
It's a very rich API space.
And you use the audio component
APIs to actually load audio
units into your software.
We do have some limited audio
access for sandboxed apps.
All the apps can play
to the system speaker.
But if you have this entitlement,
you can also gain access
to the microphone.
Now again,
going back to the core audio APIs,
you can publish a new
audio driver plugin,
which essentially means that you've
created a user space driver for audio.
It does require admin
privileges to install,
but once you've done that,
the plugin is available to all
the other apps of core audio.
And again,
it's pretty much on an equal footing
to a kernel driver at that point.
And all audio interfaces are
shareable by all clients.
Everybody can record from
the same input stream or play
into the same audio stream.
So there's no mutual exclusion there.
Now for video, we have a new framework
in Lion called Core Media.
And this is a fantastic framework.
It's modeled largely on Core Audio,
which has been very successful.
And it uses a device
abstraction layer called a DAO,
much in the same way
that audio uses a HAL.
We have an entitlement there,
which basically mirrors the
microphone entitlement for
gaining access to the camera.
And as before,
you can publish new video interfaces
if you install it as an admin.
And once it's installed,
it's visible to all
clients of Core Media.
Storage, like serial, is kind of a split
personality technology.
There's two ways to go about it.
We have one set of APIs for discovering
and managing the devices and a separate
set of APIs for actually talking
and passing data through the device.
Storage, like serial, is kind of a split
personality technology.
There's two ways to go about it.
We have one set of APIs for discovering
and managing the devices and a separate
set of APIs for actually talking
and passing data through the device.
Now, if you're not interested in
managing the actual process and
you simply just want to be aware
of what volumes are in the system,
you can search in the IO registry
to discover IO media objects.
Once you've found the device
you're interested in talking to,
though,
you get the BSD device node name for it
and talk to it through usual BSD APIs.
And the access semantics for that
are a little bit more complicated
than just mutual exclusion,
so I won't go into them here.
We also do not have any sandbox
APIs that would allow you to get
directly to a storage device.
But in general, you wouldn't need to.
You would go strictly
through the file system.
I'll only talk briefly about HID because
Thane is going to come up in just a few
minutes and walk us through a HID driver.
But it's relatively straightforward
to use the HID APIs to locate
devices on your system,
to open them, to communicate with them.
And then once you've done that,
you can also post events back to
the system using Core Graphics APIs.
So there's actually a very rich
set of things that you can do from
user space with respect to HID.
Apps can even seize input devices
like joysticks for exclusive use,
with the exception of keyboards,
which we don't want to because we
want to prevent password snooping.
And I'll talk very briefly
about image capture.
It's a new framework that's in line now.
And it allows you to discover
printers and scanners,
excuse me,
cameras and scanners that would be
typical file-based image devices.
So you can use IC Device Browser to
find the devices that are on your system
and then you can request that they
download their files so that you can
process the images that they contain.
ImageKit allows image capture devices
to be accessed directly from UI classes,
so it's a very high-level
integration for GUI apps.
So ImageKit is a great set of APIs for
doing high-level image capture access.
We currently do not allow access to image
capture devices from within Sandbox.
But apps can publish new
image capture devices,
and once they're published,
they appear as a new service of the
Mac that are visible to any client
of the image capture framework.
And last, we have printing.
We use core printing to
actually talk to printers.
If you just want to print
to an existing printer,
core printing is a great API for that.
It's very straightforward.
And with this security.print entitlement,
your App Store app can print.
If you want to publish a new
printing service on the system,
you're going to use the CUPS APIs to
create a back-end driver.
And once you've done that,
it would appear as a new
printer on your system,
visible to anybody on the system,
and in fact,
can even be shared to other Macs.
So, of course,
it requires an admin privilege to install
a new printing device on your Mac,
so not available to App Store apps.
And with that,
I would like to turn the microphone over
to Thane Norton to talk to us about HID.
Thank you.
Thanks, Dean.
Can you guys hear me all right?
OK.
So my name's Thane Norton.
I'm the IOHID team lead.
Little bit of a misnomer.
I am the IOHID team.
And I'm going to be talking to you
about how to write a userland driver,
an application that acts as a driver.
So I'm going to show you how
to find and access HID devices.
And then once you've got
events from a HID device,
how to inject those events back into the
system as key presses and mouse movement.
So I picked up this
new piece of hardware.
It looked really cool.
Said it had Mac drivers.
I was pretty happy with it.
It's got lots of buttons,
flashing lights, and everything.
But the drivers didn't work for me.
I haven't run a 32-bit system in a while,
so the 32-bit kernel extension
didn't work on my system.
And I looked at it and I said,
this would make a nice
example of a HID device.
I mean, it's got lots of buttons.
It's got a joystick.
There's these LEDs that
you can toggle on and off.
Love blinking lights.
It's got a full color backlight.
And it even has an LCD that
you can put data out to.
So what's the first step?
Well, the first step,
since it's a HID device,
is you fire up USB Prober,
and that will parse the
HID descriptor for you and show
you what the device looks like.
Now, USB Prober dumps out
a lot of information.
We don't care about most of it here.
As Dean showed you,
you want the vendor and
product ID of the device.
Any Logitech G13 will have exactly this
vendor ID and exactly this product ID.
Any Logitech device will
have this vendor ID.
Then we look at the report descriptor.
Unfortunately,
this device does not break out
the buttons and the joystick and
everything into their own little pieces.
It's one seven-byte packet.
So the next step is,
what do we do with that packet?
Well, if you're lucky,
you can get some developer
documentation and it'll break down,
this is what this bit means and
this is what that bit means.
But I didn't have that.
I was able to find some
open source drivers.
They reverse engineered
the packet formats,
both for reading from the device
and writing to the device.
And so that's where I got
my information from.
Now, if it's an input device,
you can pretty much just connect
to it and start playing with it.
And you'll see what data
comes into the system.
And you can figure out from that
which buttons you're pressing.
Lastly, if you have a device that you
can't do any of those things with,
you can put a packet sniffer on the bus
between a system that has a real driver,
a functioning driver,
and your device and see
what the packet format is.
Not for the faint of heart,
but it is an option.
So I decided to try and
write a sample project.
It hasn't really hit
Apple sample project stage,
but if you come talk to me afterwards,
I can give you a copy.
So the first thing I want to emphasize
is whenever you're writing a driver,
it's hard enough without a
consistent error handling idiom.
Make sure that you handle errors the same
way so that people don't get surprised.
Personally,
I like to use the assert macros.
They have some nice
flow control features,
and they're easy to compile
out if you don't want them.
And I strongly recommend
you take a look at ASL.
ASL is the Apple System Logger.
It's a one-stop shop
for having a log file,
putting things out to the system log,
and putting things out to
standard error with a single call.
In my application,
I even have it set up so
that in the debug build,
it goes out to standard error,
but in a release build,
it only goes out to the system log.
So your first step is you
have to find the device.
You get an IOHitManager instance.
Create your matching dictionary.
You can see here that I'm using
the toll-free bridging between
MS dictionary and CFDictionary.
This is the vendor ID and the product
ID that we found using USB Prober.
We tell the HID manager that these are
the kinds of devices we're looking for,
that is to say, the specific device.
We register our callback.
Schedule the HID Manager with a run loop.
The HID Manager can only be
scheduled with one run loop,
but you can pick whichever one you want.
And then you open the HID Manager.
And lastly, check your error.
If anything goes wrong
and the HID Manager can't
open or it can't schedule,
that will come out during that open call.
And so if you don't at
least check the error,
you won't know what went wrong.
So your callback gets called.
The first thing you do,
the very first thing,
is you register for a removal callback.
I'll explain a little bit more why later,
but if you do not do this,
you will crash.
Then you open the device.
In this case,
since I don't want to share the device,
I'm seizing it.
You can see the IOHit
option type Seize Device.
If you're talking to a keyboard or
device that you might want to share,
you just supply zero,
and it won't try and seize the device,
and anybody can look at the data.
Again, check your error state,
especially if you're
trying to seize the device.
Register your value callback.
[Transcript missing]
Now, the device reference does not
have to be retained by you because
it's retained by the manager.
What that means is it's only valid
between the time it gets supplied
to you in your device callback and
when your removal callback returns.
If you don't have a removal callback,
that device reference can be pulled
out from underneath you at any time.
So please register for your callback
and watch for device removal.
We got data from the device.
What do we do now?
So we're going to want
to generate events.
First step, create your CG event source.
Once you've got your event source,
if you're going to be doing
any kind of keyboard events,
you want to set your keyboard type.
As anybody who's from a
foreign country knows,
developers here in the States,
they've got their ANSI QWERTY keyboards.
All of them work the same.
As soon as you go to France,
you end up with an ISO AZERTY keyboard,
and the keystrokes
aren't working properly.
This is what prevents you
from having that problem.
Now, where did that 46 come from?
I went in the registry,
and I looked at the HID subinterface
ID for the device I was using.
If you're recording devices from a user,
you can use CGEvent GetSourceKeyboardType
to get the keyboard type that
you need to supply to recreate
the event that you recorded.
So the first two bytes are the joystick.
We're going to turn those
into mouse movement.
So the first thing you need to
do to generate mouse movement
is to create your position.
Now the position is
in global coordinates.
It's kind of a pain,
but it's the way the system works.
So you need to have your current x and y.
I get those by creating an event
tap and tracking all of the mouse
events that come through the system.
There's other ways to do it,
but that's the one that works for me.
Then we create our mouse event.
We posted to the system
and released the event.
If you don't release it,
you're going to eventually
run out of memory.
So that should be fairly obvious.
Now,
the only errors that you can check here
is whether or not the event was created.
If you try and post a null pointer,
you're going to crash.
So please check to make
sure the event got created.
If you want to do something more
interesting than just moving
the cursor around the screen,
you're going to have a little
bit more state to manage.
When the button goes down,
you'll do a left mouse down.
There's a similar one
for a right mouse down.
All the movement after
that is a left mouse drag,
and then when the user
releases the button,
you get a left mouse up.
Very similar for write buttons
and other mouse buttons are
a little more complicated,
but it's fairly straightforward.
You can figure it out if you want.
So now, the buttons, the parts everybody
wanted to know how to use.
We're going to turn those
into keyboard events.
First thing to do for a
normal keyboard button is we
just create a keyboard event.
You want to supply true when the button's
going down and false when it's coming up.
Now, you have to supply this
magical virtual key code.
Where does that virtual
key code come from?
It has to do with the way the
keyboard's laid out and everything,
but--
You really want to gather
the data from real keyboards.
Events.h,
you can figure out what a lot of
those virtual key codes will be,
but your best bet is to sit down
with a real keyboard and just record
the events and see what you get.
As part of my sample,
I actually have a command line utility
that you can hit buttons and it will
generate dictionary entries that you
would put in the preference file to be
able to generate those keyboard events.
We checked to make sure
the event got created,
post and release.
Now, if you want to do modifier keys,
those are a little more complicated.
You create a blank event.
Then you set its type to
a flags changed event.
Then you have to take the
global modifier state,
set the flag that you are changing,
set the virtual key code,
post and release.
Not that hard,
but a little more complicated.
So we've got some other keys on here.
We're not going to use
those to generate events,
but we're going to use them
to do internal state change.
So you can change the keyboard layout
or what the screen's displaying.
And so we want to reflect
that state back to the system.
The first thing I'm going to show
you how to do is the backlight color.
Very simple.
You roll the magical
backlight color packet,
and then call setReport to
send it out to the device.
How did I find out this format?
I looked at the open source drivers.
Same thing for the LEDs.
You roll the mystical LED packet,
send it out to the device.
It's really straightforward.
So when the device gets detached,
your callback gets called.
You want to close the device.
It's already gone.
The user's unplugged it.
The system went to sleep.
The hub got disconnected.
It doesn't make any difference.
You don't have access
to the device anymore,
so don't try to talk to it.
It won't do you any good.
You don't need to unregister anything.
That's all taken care of by the close.
No more callbacks will get called.
Nothing will happen on the run loop.
When the driver quits,
you want to call IOHit Manager Close,
release the manager reference.
Technically,
you probably don't have to do those,
but it's good form.
And that's it.
It's really straightforward.
In summary,
use an IOHit manager to track devices.
use the IOHID device references
to get data from the devices,
send data to the devices,
and monitor device state.
Now, one thing you want to keep in
mind is that one physical device
can publish multiple HID devices.
So if you've got a joystick throttle,
it may have two HID devices,
one for the joystick,
one for the throttle,
or a keyboard and mouse combo.
If you want to control the whole device,
you'll have to figure out all
the devices that it publishes.
Lastly, check your errors.
I've encountered a lot of problems with
people who write drivers and have a
problem and I just put in logging code to
see what errors they're getting and say,
"Well, you're not opening the device.
Of course it's not going to work."
Writing a HID device driver is easy.
If you've got a keyboard
sitting on your desk that has
buttons that don't do anything,
You should just go home and attach to it
and see what event you're getting back.
You might actually be able to do
something useful with those buttons.
And with that,
I'm going to hand it off to Ethan.
Hi, everybody.
My name is Ethan Bold.
I work on the I/O Kit team
with Dean and Thane,
and I'm going to talk
about sleep and wake today,
specifically how you can get
involved in sleep/wake from user
space and how you can influence it.
So the first thing we're going to talk
about is two APIs that you can use to
listen for sleep-wake notifications
and to influence sleep-wake behavior.
And then we're going to talk
about two new types of sleep
in Lion and on new hardware.
So let's start by making sure
we're all on the same page.
When I say go to sleep,
I mean what happens when
you close the lid on your
MacBook and when you open the lid,
you're waking it up.
And when we go to sleep,
we do that in a very specific order.
We start out by telling applications
that we're going to sleep and
waiting for them to respond.
Then we tell your kernel device
drivers that we're going to sleep,
where they prepare
hardware to be turned off.
Then the OS does some platform work
and maybe writes a hibernation image.
And finally,
the hardware turns off the CPU and
turns off power to the system.
When we're waking up,
we do that in the opposite order.
We start by turning on
the CPU and the hardware.
Then the OS does some
platform-level work,
maybe restores from a Hibernate image.
Then we're going to power on
your kernel-level device drivers.
And finally,
we're going to tell your applications.
So the first thing I want to talk
about is API that lets you run
code at that application stage.
And that API is called
IO Register for System Power.
You might want to run code at sleep
to close down open network connections
or close down connections to your
device or save any open files.
And you might want to reopen those
connections on wake from sleep.
The OS does wait for you to
acknowledge this sleep notification,
so you have to acknowledge by calling
IO Allow Power Change after you've
handled your sleep notifications.
So,
let's look at a couple of code samples.
Here's how you can register
for sleep/wake notifications.
You just call ioregister
for system power.
That's going to populate an
IO notification port for you.
You can turn that IO notification
port into a CFRUN loop source,
and you can add that to your CFRUN loop.
When you're done handling
sleep/wake notifications,
you should call
IOD Register for system power.
Now you can also get your
notifications on a dispatch queue.
This code looks much like the last slide.
You call ioregister for system power.
You call ionotificationport
create dispatch source,
and then you add that
source to a dispatch queue.
And when you're done,
you call iodregister
for system power again.
That's how you would sign up
and release those notifications.
Here's what your code might look
like handling those notifications.
There are three messages
that we'll send you.
for sleep and wake.
The first one here is KIO message
system has powered on.
That's a--that's the message
we're going to send you on wake up
after we've turned on the hardware
and turned on all the devices.
You will get to run code at
system has powered on time.
Note that you do not need
to acknowledge this message.
The next message you
do have to acknowledge,
that's KIO message, system will sleep.
You're going to get this message
sent out before system sleep.
Like I said, you have a chance to save
files or close connections.
So you can do all that here,
but you must call IO allow power
change ASIP so that OS X can continue
putting your machine to sleep.
And the longer you wait to call it,
the more awkward the user
experience is for the user.
And finally, there's a third message
you need to listen to.
It is KIO message can system sleep.
Historically,
this was the API that you would use to
prevent a machine from idle sleeping.
But we have a better API that
we're going to talk about
next called Power Assertions
for preventing system sleep.
So you still need to listen for this
can system sleep message and acknowledge
it with I/O Allow Power Change.
There's really no
reason to run code here.
So let's talk about that better
alternative for preventing idle sleep.
These are power assertions.
They're a way for you to inform
OS X of what your intentions are.
and when you need the
system to stay awake.
There are two types of
assertions you can create.
They are KIOPM assertion type,
prevent user idle sleep.
When you're holding that assertion,
OS X will try its best not to idle sleep.
And you might hold this assertion
if you're doing a long-running
calculation or a build or a
firmware update or a big download.
The other assertion that you can take is
called Prevent User Idle Display Sleep.
This lets you keep the
display powered on and lit up,
so you might hold this assertion if
you're showing content to the user or if
you need some video feedback to the user.
So you take either of these
assertions by calling IOPM assertion,
create with name.
And like I said,
these replace existing API,
but one of the best reasons for them,
we like them better,
is that they're more accountable.
If you take an assertion in your code,
I can go into terminal and
type pmset -g assertions and
see who's holding assertions.
So it's much easier to see who's
keeping your machine awake at any time.
So, quick sample code.
Here's how you might create
and hold an assertion while
you're doing important work.
We're calling IOPM assertion
create with name,
and we're passing in three
arguments-- the assertion type,
prevent user idle sleep,
the initial assertion level,
kIOPM assertion level on,
and a string identifying our app.
And we get back a new assertion.
So we're going to hold that
assertion while we do work,
and when we're done,
we will release it by calling
IOPM assertion release.
So I mentioned that assertions are cool
because we can always see who's holding
one by calling pmset -g assertions.
I also want to call out a couple
of newish command line tools.
Caffeinate is a front end for assertions.
You can call -- you can just run
caffeinate at the command line and it
will hold a power assertion for you,
either to prevent idle sleep
or prevent idle display sleep.
Like I said,
PMSET-G assertions gives you the current
state of assertions on the system.
It's a quick way to see
who's keeping the machine up.
and third, PMSet-G-Log has been
around since Snow Leopard.
It'll show you a history of all of the
sleeps and wakes that your system did,
as well as
As well as log any sleep
notification delays that went on.
So if your app isn't handling IO register
for system power messages properly,
you would see that in PMset-glog.
You'd see a lot of tardy
responses for your app.
One last thing about assertions I need to
mention is that they are a hint to OS X,
and we can't always honor them.
And there's always going to be
a case where the system needs to
go to sleep and we can't stop it.
Maybe when you close the
lid on your laptop or if
you're just out of batteries.
So we try to honor the assertions,
but we can't always.
So those were the two
APIs I wanted to talk about.
And next, I'm going to tell you about
two new types of sleep in
in Lion and on new hardware--
are standby and dark-wake.
Standby is about power saving
and extending your battery life
while your machine's asleep.
Dark-wake is about running code
and having your computer on,
but keeping the screen off
so it appears not to be on.
So, first, let's talk about standby.
I have to define two
terms for you real quick,
and those are sleep and hibernate.
When I say sleep,
I generally mean suspend to RAM,
and that means that when you
close the lid on your laptop,
we're gonna keep your RAM powered,
and--and so that when you wake up,
you can come right back
alive where you were.
That's--that's fast,
but it's also expensive for battery
life because we have to keep--keep
powering that RAM while you're asleep.
When I say hibernate,
I mean suspend to disk,
and that is-- when you close
the lid on your laptop,
we're gonna take the contents
of your RAM and write it to a
file on your storage device.
And that is much better
for battery life because...
Much better for battery life
because we don't need to keep your
RAM powered while you're asleep,
but it's also really slow to get
into writing all those megabytes,
and it's also really slow to get out
of sleep because you might have to
read in two or four or eight gigabytes
to restore your system memory state.
So, Standby tries to combine those
combine those modes by sleeping at
first when you close your laptop,
and then after about an hour,
it quietly wakes up into a dark
wake and transfers the contents
of RAM into a file on disk.
So you're incurring--it costs
more battery life for that
first hour to stay asleep,
but after that,
we can extend your sleep time by weeks.
This is only supported on the
latest MacBook Air models,
the ones we released in late 2010,
and it's--you'll see it on
10.6.7 today and in Lion.
So that's standby.
Next, let's talk about DarkWake.
DarkWake is a new feature.
It applies to all of our hardware,
all of our Lion-supported hardware.
DarkWake is just like being awake,
except that the screen is off
and the audio is suppressed,
so the audio won't come on.
But the network is on,
the hard disk is up,
processes are running.
So right now we're using
DarkWake to do a few things.
First is to handle the attaching
and detaching of external devices.
When you plug in a
USB mouse to your system,
it doesn't really need to light up the
display and wake up to a full wake.
So we're using DarkWake to just quietly
wake up and quietly return to sleep
without necessarily alerting the user.
We're also using DarkWake to keep
your network connection live with
the outside world when you're asleep.
We wake up every couple of hours
to renew your DHCP lease with your
DHCP server and to call out to
Back to My Mac on Apple servers.
Because Back to My Mac announces your
computer's presence to the internet,
but you have to check into that every
couple of hours to refresh your state.
And finally, we're using DarkWake for
all kinds of sharing,
file sharing and printer
sharing and iTunes streaming.
There's no reason that your iMac
screen has to light up when you're
trying to access it as a printer
share or file share from another room.
or if you're trying to stream
content from it to your
Apple TV in your living room,
there's no reason that the iMac
in your bedroom needs to light up.
So that is DarkWake.
We aren't exposing DarkWake or
Standby in public API in Lion.
In fact,
if you are a sleep/wake notification
client of IORegister for system power,
you won't even get notified when
we wake up into a DarkWake or
when we wake up into a Standby.
So you should have to do nothing at all.
You shouldn't have to handle DarkWake
or Standby in any special way.
So that's all I have.
Please remember those two APIs,
I/O Register for System Power and
I/O PM Assertion Create with Name.
And check out both of
those in Technical Q&A,
QA 1340, for some code samples.
Thank you.